---
title: "Hello, blog" date: 2020-05-14
---

## Yet another software engineering blog

There's definitely no shortage of software engineering blogs. I know because
I've probably spent hundreds of hours reading them. However, despite my
familiarity with the medium, I've always resisted the idea of creating my own.
What could I possibly have to offer? At the moment, I'm just scratching the very
surface of programming and related topics. Why add another lonely constellation
of pixels to the internet? Well, I've had a change of heart, and I wish I had
gotten started earlier.

Programming accumen aside, personal stories are inherently unique and sharing
them is valuable. As a 30 year-old who career switched from tech sales into
software engineering, hearing personal stories from devs with non-traditional
backgrounds has been critical. It's too easy to look at your more experienced
peers and think "I'm never going to reach that level because _(insert flimsy
excuse here)_." In our minds, we rationalize our feelings of inadequacy with
excuses like "I don't understand all the theory," "I don't have a CS degree,"
"all of my experience is limited to _(insert technology here)_," and so on...
The only reason I know that everyone has had these thoughts at some point is
because I've heard it from so many experienced developers I know or follow!

## What's next?

So, this blog a place to store my notes and thoughts in case anyone finds them
helpful or interesting. You can expect future writings about my journey as a
budding engineer and technologies I find interesting. I don't exactly know which
topics those are yet, but don't worry. They're going to be great!

If the content here connects with even one person, then it will have been time
well spent. And hey, if it's never seen that's fine too. Publishing a written
article about a topic forces you to distill your thoughts to their most concise
and articulate form. That process solidifies your understanding and highlights
deficiencies you might not have otherwise caught.

## Thank you

I can't wrap up this post without giving a shoutout to the developers, hackers,
and hobbyists who spend their free time sharing solutions to their problems on
their blog, answering Stack Overflow questions, recording podcasts, and writing
tutorials. The amount of free, community generated resources on the web is
amazing (and overwhelming). Furthermore, reading personal stories written by
experienced devs like [Dan
Abramov](https://overreacted.io/things-i-dont-know-as-of-2018/) has kept me
going in times when I wanted to give up.

In particular, I also want to thank [Tristan Tao](https://github.com/tristantao) and
[Andrew Boni](https://github.com/andrewboni) for mentoring me up over the years.
